# war_mortality
modeling indirect mortality from war

The project started out as a replication study of an article by (Jawad et al. 2020, published in BMC)[https://bmcmedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12916-020-01708-5]. They used the Global Burden of Disease data (GBD)[https://www.healthdata.org/research-analysis/gbd], together with the Uppsala Conflict dataset (UCDP)[https://ucdp.uu.se/] and some development indicators from the World Bank etc. covering 170 or so countries and data from 1990 on until 2015 (my replication study until 2019). The purpose was to estimate age-adjusted indirect mortality (i.e. excluding battle deaths directly resulting from shelling etc.) from war (being defined as a dummy variable where war = battle deaths > 1000 in a given year, lagged by one year). 
The regression was a fixed-effects linear model (with country and year being fixed effects) with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (HC1, though using any other HC produced no difference). Random effects were tested, too, with similar findings. My replication study benefitted from a few extra years of additional data and confirmed the original findings as expected (significant coefficients of at alpha=0.01). 
I realised, however, that there were some important flaws in the original methods. Data are heteroskedastic and although heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors had been used in the study, the study did not take into account what turned out to be a more significant undue influence on standard errors: the non-independence of yearly country data. Clustering the standard errors by country (clustering by country _and_ year yielded very similar standard errors) led to very different standard errors. Furthermore, the data are heteroskedastic count data (age-adjusted deaths in a given year per country) and variance is greater than the mean (overdispersion) all of which would make a negative binomial count model (with log link, but power link yielded broadly comparable results for this data) a naturally better choice. Such a model also performs better from a machine learning perspective, using cross-validation the negative binomial model consistently gave better predictions of future mortality. Using the neg binomial with a ln(x+1) transformation of the battle deaths yielded a better fit than using the categorical war variable (>1000 battle deaths). In short, it is very likely that the original study overestimated indirect mortality from war (which it put at around 29 million for period 1990-2015). Certainly, in any case, negative binomial with log link and clustered standard errors at country level *should have been used for scientifically more sound results!!*

Then I got interested in estimating how much of the indirect mortality from war/conflict was owing to pre-existing shortcomings in a country's health infrastructure. Having worked on conflict and mass violence cases related to Bosnia (90s), Rwanda (90s), Cambodia (70s), Congo (90s to present), and Central African Republic (2000s to present), among others, it is immediately apparent how massive the differences can be in indirect mortality from war: in Bosnia they were small, in all other cases they were massive and it was clear that all those countries seriously lacked sufficient health infrastructure. I tested out different variables to measure health-infrastructure and came to the conclusion that the best data was the ("health coverage" variable)[https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30750-9/fulltext] introduced by the GBD team, which is the geometric mean of: “met need with modern contraception; antenatal care (one or more visits and four or more visits); skilled birth attendance coverage; in-facility delivery rates; vaccination coverage (three doses of diphtheria–pertussis–tetanus, measles vaccine, and three doses of oral polio vaccine or inactivated polio vaccine); tuberculosis case detection rate; coverage of antiretroviral therapy for populations living with HIV, and coverage of insecticide-treated nets for malaria- endemic countries.” I interacted this variable (lagged by 2 years, to get the pre-conflict health baseline) with the conflict variable (testing out various measures: continuous battle deaths, ln(continuous_battle_deaths +1), dummy for >1000 battle deaths; all lagged by a year) and with most of these, esp. the dummy battle death measure, the coefficients were meaningful and significant (alpha=0.01, sometimes alpha=0.05), _despite_ suffering multicollinearity issues (with several of the development indicators, esp. education, fertility) which inflates SEs (and depresses significance). However, issues arose as soon as the SEs were clustered at country level (alpha=0.05, sometimes alpha=0.1) and as soon as a negative binomial model with log link and clustered SEs was used the alphas were insignificant beyond redemption, so publication was out of the question.

I had intended to do follow up tests with global geospatial data on travel distance to health facilities and a small dataset of attacks on health facilities as well as a few other geospatial data to measure their impact on conflict-related mortality, but initial tests showed no significance and the health facility attack data set was too small. I had plans to do some mediation analysis (for which health baseline pre-existing to conflict) would have been a natural candidate, but in the end I ran out of time. Rudiments of all these can still be seen in the notebook file.

Most analysis was done in python, some other analyses were done with R packages in R (not shown here) for esp. generalised propensity score measures.
